README.md, before:

# Gait Detection

For detailed description of the methods and corresponding reference works, see: https://bit.ly/3JOMVDN

## Code


## Data
### Source Data
The [Movisens Move 4](https://docs.movisens.com/Sensors/Move4/) source data consist of 24/7 time series data for each of the devices (i.e., low back, wrist, ankle sensor). The data are in binary format and contain sensing modalities for linear acceleration (`acc.bin`), angular velocity (`angularrate.bin`), barometric pressure (`press.bin`) and ambient temperature (`temp.bin`). Relevant meta-data, such as sampling frequency and units, are available from a accompanying `unisens.xml` file. In order to get from source data to a raw data format that can be further processed, the sensor data are accummulated on a per-day basis, and both data and meta-data are saved in a MATLAB struct.

### Raw Data
The resulting raw data are organized in a BIDS-like format, i.e.:
```
.
├── BraViva/
│   ├── rawdata/
│   │   ├── sub-COKI10147/
│   │   │   └── ses-T2/
│   │   │       └── motion/
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191126.mat
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191127.mat
│   │   │           ├── ...
│   │   │           └── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191203.mat
```

The `.mat` files in the `rawdata/` folder contain a single variable, `data`, namely a MATLAB struct that contains relevant data and corresponding meta-data:
```matlab
>>> load('./BraViva/rawdata/sub-COKI70030/sess-T2/motion/sub-COKI70030_sess-T2_run-2020028.mat', 'data')
>>> data
```
| tracked point | data       | acq time start
| ------------- | ---------- | --------------
| ankle         | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime
| lowBack       | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime
| wrist         | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime

For each of the tracked points, the data collected with the corresponding device is saved in a struct itself:
```matlab
>>> data(1).data
```
| type          | unit         | sampling_frequency | data
| ------------- | ------------ | ------------------ | ----
| angularRate   | dps          | 64                 | Nx3 double
| acc           | g            | 64                 | Nx1 double
| press         | Pa           |  8                 | Nx1 double
| temp          | Grad Celsius |  1                 | Nx3 double

with $N$ number of timesteps, that is $f_{\mathrm{s}}*60*60*24$ for a full day of measurement (e.g., 5,529,600 time steps at 64 Hz). 

```matlab
>>> ts_init = data(1).acq_time_start; % initial timestamp
>>> ts = ts_init + seconds((0:size(data(1).data(1).data,1)-1)'/data(1).data(1).sampling_frequency); % timestamps
>>> figure; plot(ts, data(1).data(1).data); % Plots the angular rate data of the ankle sensor
```

### Derived Data
Currently, analysis of the IMU data consists of two main applictions:
1. objective quantification of physical  activity in a general sense, and
2. detection of walking bouts, and subsequent quantitative and qualitative clinical gait analysis

The derived data are saved in a folder structure according to the following proposed structure:
```
.
├── BraViva/
│   ├── deriveddata/
│   │   ├── sub-COKI10147/
│   │   │   └── ses-T2/
│   │   │       └── sma/
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-ankle_date-20191126.tsv
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-ankle_date-20191127.tsv
│   │   │           ├── ...
│   │   │           └── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-wrist-date_20191203.tsv
```

Commit message:

Updated README with Background section

README.md, after:

# Gait Detection

## Background
Currently, analysis of the IMU data from home assessments consists of two main applications:
1. objective quantification of physical  activity in a general sense, and
2. detection of walking bouts, and subsequent quantitative and qualitative clinical gait analysis

**1. Objective quantification of physical activity**  
Physical activity (PA) is quantified by means of the so-called signal magnitude area (SMA). This measure has previously been used as a feature to detect dynamic activities from accelerometer readings, and its main benefit over simply using the acceleration norm is that it accounts for both amplitude and duratoin of a certain activity.  
*TODO*: add description of methods based on reference works!

**2. Detection of walking bouts, and subsequent clinical gait analysis**  
Walking bouts (WBs) are detected from the mediolateral angular velocity of an ankle-worn inertial measurement unit (IMU). Here, ankle-worn refers to a device that is worn laterally just above the ankle joint.  
For detailed description of the methods and corresponding reference works, see: https://bit.ly/3JOMVDN

## Code
### 1. Object quantification of physical activity
To run compute the SMA for any given device from any given study participant, simply run the batch script:
```matlab
>> batch_SMAs
```
Within this script, you need to specify some local definitions:
1. `root_dir`: this is the root directory, i.e., where the dataset is stored (e.g., `/mnt/neurogeriatics_data/Braviva/Data/rawdata`).

The batch script will then iterate over the participants (`sub_ids`), determine for each `sub_id` the available sessions (e.g., `ses-T1`) and determine for each sessions the available raw data files. Then, for each data file, the number of devices is determined and for each device individually the SMA over the entire time series is calculated. For calculating the SMA, you additionally can specify some epoch time, which is currently set to 60 seconds.

2. `epoch`: epoch time, in seconds, used for calculating the SMA

## Data
### Source Data
The [Movisens Move 4](https://docs.movisens.com/Sensors/Move4/) source data consist of 24/7 time series data for each of the devices (i.e., low back, wrist, ankle sensor). The data are in binary format and contain sensing modalities for linear acceleration (`acc.bin`), angular velocity (`angularrate.bin`), barometric pressure (`press.bin`) and ambient temperature (`temp.bin`). Relevant meta-data, such as sampling frequency and units, are available from a accompanying `unisens.xml` file. In order to get from source data to a raw data format that can be further processed, the sensor data are accummulated on a per-day basis, and both data and meta-data are saved in a MATLAB struct.

### Raw Data
The resulting raw data are organized in a BIDS-like format, i.e.:
```
.
├── BraViva/
│   ├── rawdata/
│   │   ├── sub-COKI10147/
│   │   │   └── ses-T2/
│   │   │       └── motion/
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191126.mat
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191127.mat
│   │   │           ├── ...
│   │   │           └── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_date-20191203.mat
```

The `.mat` files in the `rawdata/` folder contain a single variable, `data`, namely a MATLAB struct that contains relevant data and corresponding meta-data:
```matlab
>>> load('./BraViva/rawdata/sub-COKI70030/sess-T2/motion/sub-COKI70030_sess-T2_run-2020028.mat', 'data')
>>> data
```
| tracked point | data       | acq time start
| ------------- | ---------- | --------------
| ankle         | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime
| lowBack       | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime
| wrist         | 1x4 struct | 1x1 datetime

For each of the tracked points, the data collected with the corresponding device is saved in a struct itself:
```matlab
>>> data(1).data
```
| type          | unit         | sampling_frequency | data
| ------------- | ------------ | ------------------ | ----
| angularRate   | dps          | 64                 | Nx3 double
| acc           | g            | 64                 | Nx1 double
| press         | Pa           |  8                 | Nx1 double
| temp          | Grad Celsius |  1                 | Nx3 double

with $N$ number of timesteps, that is $f_{\mathrm{s}}*60*60*24$ for a full day of measurement (e.g., 5,529,600 time steps at 64 Hz). 

```matlab
>>> ts_init = data(1).acq_time_start; % initial timestamp
>>> ts = ts_init + seconds((0:size(data(1).data(1).data,1)-1)'/data(1).data(1).sampling_frequency); % timestamps
>>> figure; plot(ts, data(1).data(1).data); % Plots the angular rate data of the ankle sensor
```

### Derived Data
The derived data are saved in a folder structure according to the following proposed structure:
```
.
├── BraViva/
│   ├── deriveddata/
│   │   ├── sub-COKI10147/
│   │   │   └── ses-T2/
│   │   │       └── sma/
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-ankle_date-20191126.tsv
│   │   │           ├── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-ankle_date-20191127.tsv
│   │   │           ├── ...
│   │   │           └── sub-COKI10147_ses-T2_tracksys-imu_trackedpoint-wrist-date_20191203.tsv
```
